#March 5, 2013
***
## Exam
-	Everything in Chapter 1 is important.
-	For Roman Marriage, mostly focus on Augustus' law for orders to marry (Failed because the amount of exemptions given) and law against adultrey.
-	Housing and city life - roads, sewers and campus martius (passage 88).
-	Chapter 5, are the themes and that scientific medicine came from Greeks (Hippocrates). Aristocratic Funerals is a very important passage which took place in mid republic.
-	3 Levels of education: tutoring, gramticus, rator. Everyone hated their school teachers.
-	Occupations, scorn for the working class gives stereotypes (worked with hands). Grain (annona - grain and price) was important, with subsidies. Land Reform in late repubic with Senator Gracchas, with Gracchi becoming the brothers.

-	For Knapp, see the announcement on sakai.

-	Concepts and terms are very good to study.

-	For name, just know whats on the handout.

## Slavery (Continued)
-	Slaves are part of the family.
-	Slaves only had a name.
-	Libertus - freed person or a liberta for a woman.
-	20% of population was slaves. Need half a million new slaves because of life expentancy.
-	It's very hard to identify slaves.
-	Slaves were complicated legally, both persons and things.
-	60s BC was all the revolts. Colluseium was built by some Jewish Slaves.
-	Foundlings contributed to slave popultion from both poor and rich.
-	Slave population is overwhemingly male.
-	414 BC - Athens, various confiscations.
-	Manumission - relief of a slave from his masters power, grants the slave a citizenship.
-	Much easier to buy slaves then have a breeding program.