# March 27, 2013
***
## Computer Internals
-	The **ALU** is the *Arithmetic Logic Unit*. It is hardwired to do addition, subtraction, logical and/or/xor, comparision (result from some condition code), changes to control flow, and character operations (move bytes, compare bytes, interrupt).
-	It's basically the core of every processor. It uses **condition codes**, or bits to show if results where zero, negative, carry occured, etc.
***

## Conversion with Radix
-	A method that lets us convert numbers of different bases, **including** floating point numbers.

$$d_{n-1} * r^{n-1} + … + d_{0} * r^{0} + d_{-1} * r^{-1} + … + d_{-m} * r^{-m}$$

-	Take each digit, multiply it by the base with an exponent value. The exponent is in what placement.
-	With decimal numbers, go backwards and use negative exponents.

-	For example, in binary:

$$1011.01_2$$

-	$$$1*2^3+1*2^1+*2^0+1*2^{-2}$$$ = 11.25

-	In order to go from decimal to any base, divide by the base you want to go to. For example, using $$$123.375$$$

$$123/8 = 15, remainder 3$$
$$15/8 = 1, remainder 7$$
$$1/ 8 = 0, remainder 1$$

-	This gives us the LEFT side, since we are dividing.

$$0.375*8 = 3.0 (3)$$

-	This gives us the right side, we **stop when the value after the decimal point is 0**.

-	To put this as our answer, read the **integral part** from **bottom to top** and the fraction part **top to bottom**.

$$173.3_8$$
***

## Gray Code
-	The size of the resulting gray code of n-bits is $$$2^n$$$.

1 bit	|	2bit	|	3bit
--------|-----------|--------
0		|	00		|	000
1		|	01		|	001
		|	11		|	011
		|	10		|	010
		|			|	110
		|			|	111
		|			|	101
		|			|	100
		
-	Converting **from binary to gray** is created by shifting right one bit, and then an exclusive or.
-	Converting **from gray to binary** is created by
***

## Assembly Instructions
-	Basic assembly instructions are read in this order: right to left source, right to left destination.
	-	For example, `96(%ebp,%eax,8)` means "multiply 8 by memory of eax register, added to memory of ebp register, then add 96 to this". This can be a source **or** a destination *but **not** both*.
-	Parenthesis is **always** memory (think derferencing).
-	The difference between `leal` and `mov` is `mov` actually moves contents, `leal` just copies the address (**not** the contents).
***

## Call Stack
-	`esp` - stack pointer, **points to top of stack**.
-	`ebp` - base pointer, **frame pointer**.
-	**Pushing** - subtract.
-	**Popping** - addition.
-	The **prologue** is code to set up the stack-frame. The **epilogue** is what undoes the prologue, reversing it.

```
	 Prologue
	 ----     --------
     push     ebp
     mov      ebp, esp
     sub      esp, 20 
     
     Epiloguee   
     ---      --------
     mov      esp, ebp
     pop      ebp
     ret      8
```
***


## Logic Gates
-	AND looks similar to a half circle.
-	OR looks similar to a curved triangle (all 3 lines are curved).
-	NOT gates are triangles with a dot **after** it (dot shows negation).
-	XOR gates look similar to OR gates, but with a second curved line before the gate.
-	NEGATION is created by a whole circle going to the output (after the gate).
***
## Endianness and Changing
-	Swap only the bytes, not the bits in the bytes.
-	**Big Endian** - most significant first.
-	**Little Endian** - leat significant first.
***

## A Guide to Understanding Pointer Issues
-	An array **is always a pointer** to n data-types. `array` and `array[0]` point to the same location in memory. In order to always find the start, we set up a pointer (a `*` in C) to some temporary value. So, we have `int *arraystart` and `arraystart = array`.

-	Placing a pointer to a value - Use the asterisk.
-	Placing a value to a pointer - Use the ampersand.

```
int *p;
int i;


int i2 = *p;

int *p2 = &i;
```

-	Using this code, we can get the integer value in p, and can point p2 to the value of i.

```
int a[2];
int i = *a;
int i2 = a[0];
```
-	Using this code, we have an array of 3 elements. We can use `*a` to get the first element, or use `a[0]`.

```
int a[2];
int i = *(a + 1);
int i2 = a[1];

//	a[i] == *(a + i); 
```
-	Using this code, we have an array of 3 elements. We can use `*(a + 1)` to get the second location (this is the + 1). Or we can simply use `a[1]`. All `a[i]` does is `*(a + i)` where i is the index.

-	When declaring a function parameter, use the asterisk.
-	When using the address of a value, use the ampersand. When we want to read or write the value in the pointer, we use an asterisk.
-	Modifying any pointer, we must use the asterisk as parameter, and in the function code.
-	Ampersand **does not** give value.